hi and welcome to the linear drumming
section ok linear drumming means that at
no time on any subdivision
are you ever playing more than one drum
okay so all the beats that I was playing
before that's sixteenth note figures
like okay that was linear that was a
linear beat and you'll notice that no
time was I ever playing like bass drum
and hi-hats together like or hats and
snare okay linear beats whether it's
sixteenth notes or triplets or
thirty-second note triplets everything
is broken up so you're only playing one
drum on any given subdivision so a
sixteenth note pattern which might be
one E and a two E and a three
you have to split it up between the
limbs okay and and that can kind of in
itself be a little bit of a skill that
you're going to have to learn or even
unlearn sort of playing together all the
time and what we're going to do first of
all is learn about four basic units that
I've observed in my own playing and a
lot of popular linear beats to be sort
of the main patterns if you will or
units that most beats are made up of
okay most linear beats so the first two
are very similar the first one is just
bass drum snare drum hi-hat okay so and
that's even a feel that you're probably
you know used to playing around the kid
on the Tom's and so on very common
pattern okay so with all of these
exercises by the way we'll always be
playing the left hand on the snare and
the right hand on the high hats okay so
the first pattern is just bass rum snare
drum hi-hat so just get used to that yes
it's a pattern of three so you can think
of it as triplets in the start but
ultimately we're going to be playing it
not only in triplet patterns but as a
cross phrase within sixteenth note
patterns as well okay so just get used
to that cycling it over and over
kick snare hats kick snare hats okay
don't worry about any internal dynamics
at this point don't worry about ghosting
you know the snare drum or the hi-hat or
anything just get used to that pattern
once it's comfortable at a really slow
tempo of course practice it to a
metronome gradually build up the speed
okay so that's the first pattern the
second pattern is just the opposite of
that as far as the hands go so again
it's a pattern of three think of it as
triplets in the beginning and you just
play the bass drum hi-hat snare drum
instead of bass drum snare drum hi-hat
okay so you're just swapping the hands
around okay and it sounds a little bit
different the high hats are coming in
straight up for the kick so we get bass
drum hi-hat snare drum bass drum hi-hat
snare drum okay so that's that's the
first two patterns and any time I'm
playing a beat like okay there I was
playing the first pattern just going
okay so that's the first but that's the
first two patterns the third pattern is
just this is we are actually going to
incorporate some internal dynamics into
this third pattern the pattern is a
sixteenth note pattern and we play on
the high hats on all of the downbeats as
an accent so we play the shoulder of the
stick on the edge of the high hats and
we get one two three four and we're
subdividing sixteenth notes so we're
thinking one-e-and-a two-e-and-a
three-e-and-a four-e-and-a one this is
the third pattern on 1e and each of the
e and sixteenth notes for every beat
we're gonna play two ghost notes on the
snare drum okay and that means that we
drop the stick from a really low height
whatever we want to play soft we just
drop the stick from a low high because
you can't really play loud from a low
height unless you snap the stick okay so
that's that's a way to guarantee that
you'll get those softer notes okay so on
e and and we play ghost notes so we get
one E and two E and three E and four E
and one okay and one E and AH the a fee
for each of the four beats is played on
the bass drum nice and solid and we get
one E and two E and three E and four E
and a one okay so there I'd use that
pattern in something like okay so that's
the third basic unit the fourth basic
unit doesn't use the hi-hats at all it
just uses the bass drum and the snare
drum ghost notes we're still going to be
playing the ghost notes on the E and the
ant but on the downbeat all of the down
beats one two three and four we play
bass drum and on the one E and AH all of
the athletes we play the bass drum as
well so really slow we get one E and AH
two E and three E and four E and AH one
okay so once you've got that nice and
even at a slow tempo again with all of
this stuff it's crucial that it's really
nice and even at a slow tempo these
patterns because they're quite busy they
will not work unless they're even and
they sound like a dog's breakfast if you
don't have them dead even okay so the
way to do that used to always slow it
down practice it with a metronome really
slow so gradually speed it up when
you're comfortable with the pattern one
E and two E and three E and four E and
so that might be something like okay so
they're the four basic units let's now
have a look at some exercises that deal
with just unit one and just unit 2 and
then unit one and two but instead of a
units one and two being triplets okay
we're going to put those three notes
those cycling three notes into sixteenth
note phrases okay so the counting is
going to be if we've got it our pulse
just ticking over one two three four a
little bit slower one-e-and-a
two-e-and-a three-e-and-a for the pulse
is going to be like this the accents for
those three notes cycling over are going
to be as follows one E and a two E and
three E and four E and one three four
one okay so that's how that works okay
so in all of these exercises where we're
using just the basic first two units
don't worry so much about internal
dynamics these these patterns are just
designed to get you used to splitting up
your hands so you'll be playing things
like okay don't worry so much about
dropping the stick from a really low
height okay either with the snare drum
or the high hats again these are just
beginning exercises just to learn how to
split up the hands okay so trying to
break you away from playing okay things
like that so let's have a look now at
these first basic patterns okay we've
had a look at some basic patterns let's
now have a look at incorporating all
four units into some actual beats that
you probably use okay so now we're going
to be looking more at things like
okay some actual Bates way you would use
this linear style plane